Well, the next thing I think he got wrong was he
argued too much about the mechanism. Now, we know
very little about the inside of the Earth, and I
think one should separate fairly clearly
arguments about matters that are fairly direct
consequences of observation. If you're going to
argue that continents have split and moved apart,
you would best argue it, on the evidence for it
having happened, not on arguments to show that it
must happen from models of the Earth. I mean, it is
not a strong argument to say that we know so much
about the inside of the Earth that such and such
things will happen and the Earth will be split
apart, because you know so little about it. You do
better to separate very clearly the evidence for
the thing having happened from the evidence of the
reasons why it happens. You can see this in an ice
age. For a hundred years we've known there have
been ice ages and the evidence for this is seen in
the mountains. The evidence for glacial periods
in Europe and North America is overwhelming. But
we still don't know why they happen. You can
perfectly well have accepted facts and a view of a
historical process without knowing the driving
mechanism. And if you start arguing too early
about the driving mechanism, you'll get into a
morass of controversy with theoretical
physicists. Another nice example of this is the
example of cigarette smoking and cancer, which
was an observed fact before there was a theory of
it. There isn't much of a theory now. And another
one is cholera. that cholera was discovered to be
waterborne before it was known to be due to
bacteria and so that I think Wegener made
fundamental misjudgments about how to conduct a
scientific argument and the literature of the 20s
is extremely interesting I've written a paper on
this so I won't say any more about it there's a paper
in last year's advances in geophysics in which I
I've collected a lot of quotations in the
literature of the period. Things like, there's a
man who says, the idea of continental drift is a
beautiful vision and we try and clasp it in our arms
and embrace it and it dissolves and we are left with
nothing. He was, of course, a Frenchman. Well,
anyway, Wagner, by and large, lost the argument in
North America and in England. He did not lose it in
the southern hemisphere. In South Africa, the
evidence is very much clearer. The reason being
that on the whole, the geological structures in
South America and in South Africa run across the
coast. I mean, for example, the the Fold Mountains
of Cape Province. They run parallel to the south
coast, but they run across and out to sea around
Cape Town, and are picked up again on the other side
in, I think it's Ecuador. I never know which South
American republic is which. And very, sorry,
Dutoit, the South African geologist, Alexander
Dutoit, went to South America. and wrote a
beautiful passage in which he said he found it hard
to believe he was not in some rarely visited part of
the Cape Province. The complete succession of the
rocks, the point at which the ice ages occurred,
everything repeated. And it was much more obvious
in South Africa and South America than it was in
North America where the structures, the
Appalachian Mountains, run parallel to the coast
and then up into Greenland.
So that Wegener lost the argument before the war,
and the argument died during the 30s for lack of new
things to say about it. And when I came into these
things, geological feeling was very strong in
favor of the permanence of the oceans and the
stability of the continents. And after the war,
there were various converging things which made
caused the revolution of thought. The first, I
think, was the study of paleomagnetism.
Paleomagnetism is the study of fossil compasses.
This showed, at first it looked rather probable,
gradually became more and more likely that the
continents had moved relative to each other
because the compasses buried in the rocks did not
all point to a single pole. And I was personally
convinced, I was more or less convinced early on by
Keith Runkall of Newcastle. Runkall and Blackett
were the great new originators of this. Work had
been done by the French at the beginning of the
century, and no one paid the slightest attention
to it. Largely, I think, because it was written in
French. Very curious that this very good French
work of the early 1900s was completely ignored and
then extracted later. All the references to this
will be found in my paper. But Runcorn was also, I
think, psychologically unwise. When he had a
moderate case, he insisted that everyone must
believe it. I remember him saying to me once,
Teddy, you do agree, don't you? And I said, well,
Keith, it looks like it. It looks it's all right.
but I don't feel 100% certain, I don't feel it's
conclusive. And he said, Teddy, those who are not
with us are against us. Well, this kind of
attitude, you see, stiffened people's
objections, really. I'd have believed it, I
think, a year before, if it hadn't been for the way
Runcorn approached it. But then one of Runcorn's
students, a man called Irving, who was also at
Cambridge in the later part of this exercise, he
was in Manchester with Blackhead at first,
Incidentally, Rumcorn got the professorship in
Newcastle, and actually I was to a great extent
instrumental in getting him the professorship in
Newcastle, mostly because I wanted his job in
Cambridge. He's the man who had the bottom of the
heap job, which I took in Cambridge. There are
various funny stories connected with this
exercise, the effort to get Runcorn, who was then
very young, put into a, made head of the physics
department in Newcastle. Well, anyway, Runcorn,
very bright, good man indeed, but not the most
tactful man in the world. Well, then, the first
thing then that looked really conclusive was the
paleomagnetism. At the same time, the study of the
oceans was going on, and the first thing that
looked odd was that the sediments were so thin. If
the oceans had always been there, one would expect
kilometers of sediment, but 100 meters was quite
rare. Sediments, really very thin sediments,
particularly in the middle of the oceans,
sediments thickening as you went out. Then it was
gradually borne in on us that the sediments were
all fairly recent. In the last 10% or so less than
that, the last five or ten percent of geological
time. A very striking observation, but at first of
course not so striking because one found the
sediments were young and one said, well of course
they're young, they've just been put down on the
bottom, we're looking at the surface of the
superficial layer. But then we started to get
sediments going back a couple of hundred million
years. which is only a small portion of the history
of the Earth. But there were plenty of sediments
back a couple of hundred million years, and then
nothing. So there was this very surprising result
that we had sediments, not only recent sediments,
but sediments up to a certain age, and then
nothing. And of course, this was quite mysterious
and was only a thing. No one discovered it. It just
gradually appeared as we collected data. The man
who made the great jump, I think, was Harry Hess, in
a way. Harry Hess, who was also brought into this
subject by Dick Field, was interested in the
mid-ocean ridges, and via a process which has
never been entirely clear to me, said that he
thought that new ocean crust was being formed
there. Various people had said it before. I had
said this. I was surprised to find the other day
that I had said this just after the war, I think. But
without the idea that there was sea floor
spreading, that this involved, I said crust is
being formed, and I hadn't realised quite that
this involved moving the other out of the way. But
he said the idea of sea floor spreading, that new
crust was being formed on the axis, and the old
crust was moving away. And then it was not a great
jump to say, well, there are no earthquakes on the
junction of the Atlantic and Europe, or the
Atlantic and North America, the Atlantic and
South America, the Atlantic and Africa, and
therefore nothing's happening there. The
continents are moving with the oceanic crust. But
this was not very clear, not very obvious. It was an
idea of Hesse's. I didn't take it all that
seriously. It was produced, I think, somewhere
about 1960. And then This party we had in the Indian
Ocean, the penny drop fall, we'd been doing
magnetic survey at sea for some years. And we had
found ups and downs in the intensity of the
magnetic field, which were clearly connected
with, in some way, with the magnetization of the
sea floor. But we didn't understand it. I made
something of an ass to myself by writing a review of
the subject without seeing the point. Very
interesting to look back at it now, somewhere
about 1960. I wrote an article, it was published a
year or more later, in which I didn't see the point.
And then, Matthews and Vine, who were in a naval
ship in the Indian Ocean, doing a detailed survey
of a square degree in the Indian Ocean. I'd always
had a desire to do a detailed survey of a small piece
of the mid-ocean ridge. I made the suggestion
before the war, and war came too soon, and
eventually in 1962, I think it was, we did this
square debris. I wasn't there, it was done by
Matthews and Vine in a naval survey ship, and they
were able, as well as doing the topography, to do
the magnetic field, and they did a very detailed
survey, and they saw that certain of the mountains
on the bottom of the sea were magnetised the wrong
way round. Well, and then the penny dropped and
they said all these ups and downs, wiggles of the
magnetic field on the bottom of the sea are a
record, a tape recording of the reversals of the
Earth's magnetic field. They're recorded on the
axis of the ridge as the lavas cool and then they're
carried away by, the tape moves away and a double
recording is made I'm not going to explain this in
detail. Myself and everyone else have written
numerous papers about it. But this was the, in
practice, the conclusive thing. But it's
interesting, only two years before, I had been
asked to give a talk to the Geological Society of
London. I was rung up by the president, Ullman. And
he said, look, we've got a set of Bolsheviks in this
society. who think that the meetings ought to be
interesting. And they say our meetings are too
dull and too detailed and we ought to have some
review lectures. And he said, would you give a
review lecture? We feel we can't oppose this. We
must, the council feels that it must give in to some
extent. And would you give a lecture? I said,
please do. And he said, what will you talk about?
And I said, I will talk about continental drift.
And he said, oh, will you? And I said, yes, I'd like
to. And he said, well, of course, there's never
many people come to the June meeting. Perhaps we
could have it there. So I said, all right, that'd be
nice. And so I came along to the June meeting and I
went in to tea. There seemed to me to be a fair number
of people in tea. And the Genealogical Society is
an old-fashioned body and it's customary for the
fellows to go in, the audience to go in and sit down
and wait a moment. And then the the president and
the secretaries and the treasurer walk in, a sort
of concession. This time they couldn't get in
because all the aisles were blocked by people
sitting in them. We had the biggest audience who
could possibly get into the room, people poking
their heads through the doors, and the president
and the secretaries had to come in through the
window from the courtyard outside. Well, this I
took as a sign that it was an idea whose time had
come, And I gave a talk not using the ideas that Vine
and Matthews were having. I think they hadn't
quite been produced at the time I gave the talk. And
when I wrote it up, I thought it would be unfair to
them to steal their thunder. So the paper, both as
given and as published, arrives at what's clearly
now the correct conclusion about the motion of the
continents and the youth of the sea floor. from the
other arguments of paleomagnetism and various
other things. And I think this had a certain
influence, and the interesting thing was that a
number of eminent geologists got up and said
they'd already always believed it. But what had
stopped them saying so was that Harold Jeffries
said that it was impossible. Well, this again is
the point, you see, that humans believe things on
their own evidence. and not because some
mathematician tells you they can't work. And one
man, Edward Battisfee Bailey, who was director of
the Geological Survey some years ago, a very old
friend of mine, got up and said, in fact, he had
given a lecture on the subject in, I think it was
1910, in the Old Vic Theatre to some audience. How
he could have come to give a lecture in a theatre on
continental drift, I don't know. But he'd never
written it up, and as far as I can make out, he'd
never mentioned the question again. Very curious
thing. And I think Jeffries really had a
considerable influence, and also the fanatical
opposition of eminent geologists in this
country. The things they said about continental
drift and about , you wouldn't believe. Someone or
other, I forgot who it was now, said that he thought
there should be a rule in all geological societies
that this matter should not be mentioned again.
This was in 1929. I give all the quotations and
references to this in my paper.
Now,
current biography in 1954, as long as we're
talking about the spirit, states that you had an
interest in the utilization of solar energy from
eucalyptus trees. Oh, I know what that is. I was
interested in solar energy, and I
I think I became interested in it during the first
Labour government, not the first Labour
government, the Labour government just after the
war, when I was first director of the National
Physical Lab. They believed that the wicked
capitalists had prevented the British public
from getting the advantages of science for their
own nefarious reasons. And one of the things that
was raised was that nothing was being done about
solar energy. And that this was a wicked plot by the
capitalists. Well, I was asked about this, and I
said I didn't believe it. But they said, well,
look, would you set up a committee to inquire into
this? So I set up a committee, Patrick Blackett,
myself, Will Hawthorne, Barry Sullivan, about
half a dozen of us. And I was chairman, and I wrote
the report, and I think really did most of the work.
I've always regarded the report as one of my
publications, but in fact, it is a production of
the committee. And this is really a child's guide
to the subject, it doesn't? It's quite short, and
it considers in a rough way all the possibilities.
And in this, one of the possibilities that's
considered is that you might have a continually
regenerating forest in which you burnt wood and
replanted the forest and kept going on a given bit
of land. And we show, this is clearly impractical,
for a pastation of any useful size. But everyone
quotes this for some reason. Well, this thing was
published at the time and the reference is in my
bibliography. So that was my first interest,
really, in the matter, that I was chairman of this
committee that looked into it. The report is
fairly adverse to the uses of solar energy for the
reasons that have become very apparent since
for what you get out of it. I mean, at the time when
oil was cheap, it was clearly just not on, except
for specialized requirements. I mean, if you live
in a desert miles from anywhere, it may well pay you
to have solar energy to work your pumps in some way.
But in general terms, it just wasn't on.
Naturally, the increase in the price of oil has
improved things somewhat, but unfortunately,
Capital Plant has gone up by about as much as oil
has. the increase in price of capital plant
exceeds the general inflation. So it's not really
very promising today, except for things like
heating swimming pools, who just about break
even. The interest on the capital required to warm
a swimming pool is just about compensates for the
cost of the gas you would burn. But of course there
is the risk that they stop you burning gas and
heating swimming pools, so then it might be
attractive. Well, the next thing that happened
about that was that I had a phone call In those days,
about 1954, I suppose. And in those days, there was
only radio communication across the Atlantic.
And I couldn't hear what was being said. The only
thing I could hear was that the man on the other end
was asking me whether I would deputize for the
chairman of General Motors, who was sick. And I
thought to myself, this is the only time I'm ever
going to deputize for the chairman of General
Motors. So I said, I can't hear what you say. But the
answer is yes, write and tell me what it is you want
me to do. And it turned out they wanted me to make a
keynote address to a conference on solar energy in
Tucson, Arizona. So I went over there, and I was in a
bit of a jam, because I was, after all, the chairman
of this committee that produced an adverse
report. And this meeting was clearly full of solar
energy buffs. And so I didn't know quite what to do,
because I didn't want to be rude to the audience or
to the people who'd asked me. So I got up and I said
what I thought about solar energy, a slightly
softened version of what I'd said before. I mean,
partly about the difficulties and the amount of
work that needed to be done and so on. And then I said
how good it was to be in America and how much I'd got
from my visits to America and how much I
appreciated it all, which no one ever does say.
People in Europe think they're invited to America
because it's their right to be invited. It never
occurs to anyone, really, to say thank you. And
this was a tremendous success. I was asked out that
night by Luke Douglas, who was an ambassador in
London, or had been shortly before. He was a
one-eyed banker, became a great friend of mine
afterwards. I've met him, he's dead now, I've met
him many, many times. And the mayor of Tucson and
the governor of Arizona, I forget who was governor
of Arizona there, it was Gold... Goldberg's,
what's his name? Goldwater? Goldwater's
predecessor. Well anyway, they took me out for
what in England we call a pub call. We went from one
bar to another and they taught me how to mix various
drinks. I remember it was my first introduction to
a vodka martini. And really most entertaining and
a very curious exercise a bit for an ambassador, a
governor, and a mayor to go around from one pub to
another. Of course, they were greeted everywhere
with enthusiasm. They all got freshly drunk.
Well, anyway, I tried afterwards to feed the
chairman of the Russian Academy of Sciences on
vodka martinis, but he wouldn't drink them. He
said, you can't mix up vodka like the Americans do.
You've got to drink it and eat. Well, anyway,
that's the sum total of my connection with solar
energy. Now,
is there any personal history of the Bullard
Brewing Company your great-grandfather
founded? Why were you directed for five years?
Well, it was founded, as you say, by my
great-grandfather, Richard Bullard, and that
was taken on by my grandfather, who was quite a
character. a member of parliament for Norwich
until he was ejected for bribery. Bribery in those
days was a relatively minor thing. You
distributed half crowns to people in pubs to vote
for you. I mean, about 20 cents or something of this
sort. And he was caught on this. When he got back to
Norwich after having been expelled, he was met at
the station by a large crowd who took the horses out
of his carriage and dragged him in triumph through
the streets. He was very popular locally. And a
very considerable character. Well, I'm not going
to tell stories about him. I never knew him. He died
before I was born. And then my father took over the
brewery and various uncles. My father was the main
man in running the brewery. And he, my father,
thought I was, regarded me as totally
impractical. And for many years was exceedingly
worried lest I shouldn't be able to earn my living.
when I was a boy at school that I should become
qualified as a chartered accountant, and then go
as an accountant into the brewery. And I remember
him giving me some small sum of money, investing it
for me. He produced an income of about £100 a year.
And he said, at any rate, Edward, every day of your
life, you'll be able to buy yourself lunch. Little
did he know about inflation. And this was a very
curious thing. There was really no reason to
suppose I couldn't look after my son. If I had been,
as a small child, as I said yesterday, I'd been
disturbed when I was 10. But he never realized I'd
grown up, I don't think. And so I never had any
connection with the brewery as long as he was
alive, really. I knew my way around it. I used to go
down with him as a child. He was very kind to me.
Every Saturday morning I used to go down and meet
him at the brewery and we'd go around and make the
measurements of the density of the beer or the
hydromaton and look around and see that
everything was clean and tidy. And then, when he
died, we found the brewery in quite a mess in the
sense that my father believed that money was bad
for people. In particular, it was bad for the
shareholders. And therefore he distributed the
minimum possible amount in dividends And it
stepped the money away. So there was a very large
collection of cash. And the company was a public
company. And you could buy the shares on the stock
market. He'd been forced to make it a public
company because he got into trouble with the
taxation people who insisted on making it a public
company. And if you'd bought the shares on the
stock market and got control, you'd have found
enough money to pay for them. And my cousin and I
were very disturbed about this. My cousin asked me
to become a director. And the rest of the directors
were employees of the company. So in effect, what
my cousin and I said went, because we could just
have removed the other directors if necessary. So
we ran this thing. My cousin ran it really, and I
used to go pretty frequently. And we started
buying other breweries with this money. We bought
the breweries, and we closed them down, and kept
their pubs. So we had more and more pubs. And this
was going splendidly. We were all making our
fortunes. Suddenly one day we found that Watkins,
one of the big national brewers, were buying our
shares. And we became rather disturbed about
this, and eventually they came out into the open
and said they wished to buy the thing. And the price
they offered was so high that it was clear that a lot
of the shares were held by trustees for old ladies
in the older generation of the family. And the
trustees would certainly have sold the shares at
the price that was offered, which was ludicrous.
And so we very regretfully accepted, I think, £9.2
million for an enterprise that could have been
bought for £1.5 million three or four years
before. So we did extremely well out of it, but I
very much regretted it. It's certainly been not in
the public interest and not in our interest. We
could have made more money by going on as we were. We
had other views for gobbling up other breweries.
And we were doing very well. And what's the public
is? It's given them no choice between their beers.
They have to drink Mr. Watney's beer now. And it
didn't do the Watneys much good. Of course, Mr.
Watney paid so much for the thing that they got into
financial difficulties. And the next takeover
they tried to do failed. And then they got caught
themselves by a purely financial group. And this
group paid so much for Watneys that they're now in
financial difficulties. So everyone concerned
is in financial difficulties. except the
shareholders of the company of Bullards and the
companies we took over. Of course, the people who
were in the shares of some of the breweries we took
over have been taken over three times, once by us,
once by Watney's, and once by these financiers.
And they've gained factors varying between 2 and
10 every time. So a very curious story. But that's
how I became to be in the brewing business. I was a
consultant to Watney's afterwards. It was all
done quite amiably. And now I have a pension from
Watney's. Not very much, but I do get a pension from
Watney's.